We're talking to Hugo Alvarez.
Now, this is papermaking.
And the primary, which I say, or the focal point of this collection are the dart hunters.
I have two daughters, and so to keep them from fighting, I've collected at least two of every one of dart hunters' books.
And sometimes there are three, four, five, and six, because I had to buy collections.
to get these.
So if you look in the back, you'll see many times two, three, four, five.
I didn't realize he was so prolific.
I mean, he wrote all these books.
I see papermaking through 18th centuries, Dart Hunter.
Hey, papermaking, the history and technique of an ancient craft, Dart Hunter.
And that's a boy's book.
But the key are the ones in the back, which he very suddenly did more than 200 copies, except the one
on papermaking in India, where he did 300 and some odd copies.
But most of them are limited to 200.
Now, why so few?
Because he had samples of the paper in there.
And he couldn't bring enough samples back.
So this guy is going to be pretty darn interesting for me.
And there's one called My Life with Paper.
These were all published by Knopf.
Well, these are the commercial ones that he did.
Look at this exquisite book.
I mean, here's one.
Like, this was Otto Ege, who taught at the Cleveland Art School, or School of Art, and he taught lettering, and he taught the students about incanabula and the illustrations, and he would take and buy incomplete incanabula volumes, and then take them apart, and then put them together in series, we'll say,
1200, 1250, 13, 1350, 14, so that they have an understanding.
Now I should take a look.
Look at this.
This is just exciting.
You see now, he made all this on paper.
This one here.
It says Dard Hunter Mountain House Press.
How do you pronounce it?
Hillicothe, Ohio.
C-H-I-L-L-I-C-O-T-H-E, Ohio, United States of America.
And that's out of Columbus, about an hour.
This is only 182 copies.
Wow.
Would have been impossible because, again... Can I read that?
I'll just read it into my table.
Do you want to just hold it open to where you just were?
What he said is, Owing, this is the final paragraph on the colophon page, Owing to the small amount of paper available for the printing of this book and the limited number of specimens, only 182 copies could be printed any more than this number would have been impossible.
This book is number 19, Dired Hunter.
And so therefore, if you could have done 200 or 180, okay, the paper used in printing this edition was made in 1932 in my mill at Lime Rock, Connecticut, the only handmade paper mill in America.
The title page device was printed from a woodcut found in Tonkin, T-O-N-K-I-N as in Gulf, in Indochina, which we now know as Vietnam.
The typographical ornaments used as chapter headings as well as the borders were cut and cast, especially for this book by Dard Hunter Jr.
The wood block used in printing the cover paper was produced in China.
This edition, as well as all of the preceding books from my own press, has been bound by Peter Frank, F-R-A-N-C-K, Sherman, Connecticut, S-H-E-R-M-A-N.
And then it goes into the final paragraph that I just read.
And the title of this book is... I'm going to see it right here.
Papermaking in Indo-China, Dard Hunter, MCMXLVII, 1932, is that right?
1530, that sounds good.
So tell me a little bit about this man, this Hunter.
Of course, I want to read about him now that I know these books.
In fact, I might just take a few notes.
Well, Dard Hunter...
What shall I say?
It was very unique, and so was his son, in that he did leather class.
He illustrated things.
He worked up at Chautauqua.
But, I mean, to really get it, you've got to go through the whole thing and pick it up.
what made him unique is that he traveled to these countries back in the 20s, got the samples and went to these hand-milled paper mills or factories or villages where they still were making these.
And he brought these samples back and then he ran the photographs and he wrote about this, had the samples in there, and then published these very limited editions.
And he
He was the top paper maker in this country.
I mean, if anything had—and a mead paper mill has—a mead paper has a big mill in Chillicothe.
And, I mean, this guy was just—nobody else was doing it at the time.
And then his son took over, Dard Hunter Jr., and now it's the, if you will, the third.
His son is starting back up.
He's refurbishing the house and everything else.
Oh, really?
And is he making paper?
He started to make some paper, but he's also, because his father was married the second time, and his father died, and... Maybe this is somebody I ever try and talk to, you think?
Sure.
I'll give you a phone number if you want to talk to.
Yeah.
And, um... Jared Hunter III.
Yes.
And he's doing chilla coffee?
Oh, yeah.
In Mountain House.
You're in downtown Chillicasse, the main drag, and you look straight up.
How far is that from here?
Well, let's see, two and a half, three and a half hours.
Okay.
You'd fly into Columbus, and then you'd pick a car up, and it's about an hour south.
That would be worth it, huh?
Yeah.
Well, I'm interested in the culture of the book as an artifact.
How about type?
What does he use for type?
He designed his own, cast his own, printed it.
And how about this Dard III?
Is he going to try and do the same stuff?
He's got all the equipment there.
Now, what kinds of things did he print, though?
Was he a fine press printer?
Well, I mean, as far as I'm concerned, they...
What he was doing was he was documenting this craft.
Yes, but he also designed this type and he laid it out.
I think it's a nicely laid out page.
It's as good as any.
How many copies?
Do you have that book?
I think three of these.
This is nicely laid out.
As a bookbinder, I think this is much better than some of the other books that people say are fine printers.
He left enough room in the middle.
In the gutters, we call them.
Yeah, in the gutter.
People look at it, when they space a book, they say, this is, and then they take the gutter, and they always look at it this way, and then they look at it over here.
At least he left enough room in the gutter.
I would have preferred a little bit more, because all the pages always bend.
Is this Indo-Chinese paper that he made this stuff with?
Is that why it was 182 copies of the book?
No, he made... He made the paper that... But what is the stuff that he said that was only enough to do 182 copies of?
Well, first of all, let's see if I can find any of these samples.
He usually had... There you go.
Well, this is pictures, but many times... Let's see if I can...
There's a lot of art in here.
It's beautiful.
So this is his own paper.
How about Henry Morris?
Did he make his own paper?
Let me ask you this.
It's Henry Morris.
So tell me, Dard Hunter then is an innovator in your view.
So he represents for you the pinnacle of the art.
So to collect him is to collect supreme examples of what you're interested in.
Am I on track by saying that?
Oh yeah, this is how I started my collection with Dard Hunter because I went down there as a young man from college.
Tell me a bit.
Did we talk about that, how you went down there?
Look at these.
These are the ones that Dard Hunter Jr.
did.
These are on his father and all the examples.
Volume 1 and Volume 2.
What's the title of it?
We went by a little too quickly.
The Life Work of Dard Hunter, Volume 1.
And Volume 2.
Now, he did 100 copies in leather back and leather corner like this.
Oh, look at that.
And they did all of this there?
No, the binding was done by someone else, and then he did 50 copies with a couple of extra illustrations in full leather.
So since I want to get one set for each one of my daughters, I have one like this for each one, and I have one like this for each one.
So tell me, this is interesting.
The daughters obviously share this fascination for... Kind of.
You know what I mean?
This is a gift for the daughters.
Yeah.
So is that something that they've...
pushed you to... No, no, no, no, no, no.
How old are you?
How old are your daughters?
I think it's 26 and 30.
Do they know you're doing this?
Oh, yeah.
They know that, you know, Dad's up to his usual tricks, you know.
You know, these are strictly... Dart.
Dart.
That's quite a nice setup there.
You must have designed this.
We're looking at these shelves.
Imagine how sturdy they have to be to hold that weight, especially all like this.
You can stand on this corner about the heaviest metal shelving on the side.
I've never seen anything quite like it.
These are papermaking in America.
One of them is still in signature form.
That's a book that's the title of Paper Making in America.
That's the last one he did senior.
I'm still not up to speed on him.
Now, was this an intellectual, a scholarly enterprise for him?
Did he print things, job work?
Did he print things for people?
No.
So what did he do?
He did this.
He had some outside money.
The family had some money.
So he was a scholar.
He was a scholar.
Obviously, he had Alfred Knopf as a publisher, so Alfred Knopf must have been very fascinated.
Everyone was fascinated because he was so unique in that he visited the area, then he got samples, took photographs, then he wrote the story, then he made the paper, then he designed the type, he made the type, and he printed it.
And what he printed was his own... His own work.
His own findings of the results of his own research.
Right.
And now all of this stuff has basically disappeared.
This is becoming very fascinating to me, you see.
If I'm writing about book culture, he was a student of book culture who carried it to an extreme.
Yeah, and he did it after World War I, and it was all done before World War II because all of this stuff basically has disappeared because of the war.
You mean disappeared in the country of origin?
Yes.
So do you think in an ironic kind of way it's preserved through the efforts of an American?
Unusual.
Very unusual.
So could you identify some of the countries that he did by some of the... Well, here's one, Papermaking in Siam.
In Siam, which is... Chinese ceremonial paper.
Mm-hmm.
You have papermaking by hand in India.
I see a papermaking pilgrimage to Japan, Korea, and China.
Then I see a papermaking pilgrimage that's the same.
That's the same.
So those are numbers.
Yeah, these are in India.
Those are four volumes of the same.
Right.
So there's two for the girls and two more for you.
Now, let's see.
I was going to show you that gal that's up there in...
So, how did this, again, what was the genesis of this collection for you, the spark?
When I visited him, and my dad died while I was still in college.
Now, you visited Dart Hunter.
Dart Hunter.
Did you meet him?
Yes.
Senior?
Oh, yes.
In fact, let me show you what happened.
Peter ties it off.
I collected these.
This is so beautiful.
I collected these all, you know, many of them.
And so one time Peter said, let's go have them sign them.
So, of course, they're signed in the back.
These weren't signed prior to that?
These were signed.
They're all signed, like this.
So I drove down with Peter.
But they were already signed then.
Already signed in the back.
So you wanted them signed again.
So I wanted them signed again.
So I see them looking around over your shoulder at the title page.
Right.
So we drove down.
We arrived in the afternoon, and he knew of me because I talked to him.
And Peter and I, he invited us in, being a perfect gentleman.
His wife had died.
The younger son hadn't been married yet.
And we were sitting in the living room.
And he said, what brings you fellows down here?
And I said, well, we'd like to have your books that I've collected.
signed on the title page.
He said, wait, wait, wait, wait, I got them all signed in the back.
I said, yes, but won't you sign mine on the title page to make them very unique?
Nope.
Sacrilegious.
What was sacrilegious about it?
He didn't want, nope.
He designed it this way.
He didn't want it.
He didn't want to fool around with it.
So how did you get him to sign it?
It's very simple.
Peter said,
About 6 o'clock, he said, you know, there's paper dust in this house, don't you have a drink?
Well, neither the father nor the son drank.
So they brought out a half bottle of scotch and a little bourbon, see?
So we started to drink.
Well, I drank the bourbon, Peter drank the scotch, see?
And it got to be about 9.30.
And finally he said, aren't you fellas ever going home?
And Pete looked at him and he said, well, we will as soon as you sign these books.
So the old man said, okay, I'll sign them.
So Peter got up.
I said, no, Pete, you sit in the house.
I'll go out and get the books.
That way they can't lock us out.
So Pete sent him, and I came in with three cartons of books and typed manuscripts and things.
And he signed everything except that one typed manuscript that I had of a talk that he'd given.
He said, I don't remember it.
I won't sign it.
He signed everything else.
Now, I was just... It was something.
His son was up here just about a month ago, and he brought me this letter to get a kick out of it.
So this is Jackson, whoever Jackson is.
I don't know who that is yet.
I haven't had a chance to check this all out.
Now, you read that while I try to sign... Yesterday I had a visitor, a rare occasion.
A rare occasion, which is a visitor.
Well, he doesn't... He never...
He was a retired librarian from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
When Elmer and I were there, see, this is a carbon, see, this is the pre-Xerox days.
In 1954, we had met him, although I'd forgotten.
A week or two ago, this is in the same letter, one, two, three, four, five, the fifth paragraph.
This is in 19...
So he lived into the 60s then, is that right?
A week or two ago, I talked from Cleveland from a man I did not know, his name being Hugo Alpers.
He asked if I would autograph a book or two if he would come down at Chilapati about 350 miles.
Of course I agreed.
In a few days he arrived with two huge cartons of books, all from my private press or from the Pinson printers.
I was amazed to see what he had.
Three copies of the literature of papermaking, 1925, four copies of primitive papermaking, 1927, and duplicates of many of my other books, including six copies each of the two books Elmer had done, 1936 and 1939.
He wanted them all autographed on the title pages, and although I objected to this particular spot,
He insisted, and I complied.
All of the books were in mint condition.
He said he would buy any books of mine that were offered.
What strange turns book collecting can take!
Please forgive a badly typed letter, as I'm not only writing in the dark, but I'm using only one eye today.
And this is April 30th, MCMLXV, which is 1965, from Chillicothe, O'Hara, addressed to Dear Jacksonville.
So this is a typescript, a carbon copy of a wire, apparently, that he sent out.
The Darren Hunter stuff basically occupied this stuff.
Yes.
How many books did he do?
Do you have a sense of... Oh yeah, I have... I can tell you that.
And you have everything, I assume?
Oh yeah.
There's nothing you don't have?
No.
How about designs and stuff?
Does his son have that, or his grandson?
No, his grandson has everything.
But you've thought about trying to get that stuff.
No, his father offered some of that for sale one time to me, and I told him I wouldn't buy it, he should keep it for his son.
And he did keep it for his son.
And...
I'm surprised.
Well, he got hard up for money.
But I'm surprised that you didn't make an offer for it.
No, I wouldn't do it.
I told him no.
I knew him well enough that I could tell him, don't do this.
You're going to regret it.
As much as you probably would love to own it.
I would have loved to own it.
We had some financial deals, so I helped him out at the time.
So you became very, very friendly then with the family.
Oh, I know.
Very close.
So that was the introduction.
So did you go see Senior again?
I saw Senior a number of times.
Did he ever talk about the day he signed all these books?
He'd always look at me.
He basically signed them to get rid of you, right?
He had to.
I wasn't going to leave.
And he'd always say, you haven't got any more.
I'm not going to do it.
It is kind of sacrilege, though, isn't it?
I understand that a lot of people don't like to fool with a page.
But I thought I'd make mine unique.
You didn't know that.
Well, I didn't care.
I wanted it for my daughter.
I figured I could always get Einstein copies on the title page.
The fact that he did it is amazing.
Yes.
And how old were you?
You were just a kid at the time.
65.
That's 1961.
That's 31 years ago.
65.
Let's see.
I was 30, 37.
at the time, just shortly after I got married.
So you were collecting then.
You came out of the service, you told me, this morning, with the idea of already knowing what I wanted.
And you gave one particular bookseller hell because he didn't save stuff for you, my dart hunter.
Yes.
Is that right?
Yes, I wanted my dart hunters.
And so then what he did is he made me buy the catalogs to Park Burnett.
And he said, now here's the way you learn, because they have the estimate, the description, and then they will give you back the results at a later time.
And so slowly I began to become familiar with how a catalog was written, the words, and, you know, reading a catalog is very tricky because you have to know who wrote the catalog, because what is good to me is
fair to you and is poor to the next man, so you have to know the catalog.
You know, I've never seen this book.
It's 1943.
The Dart Hunter Museum now is down in Atlanta.
Uh-huh.
If you're down in Atlanta, you want to give a call to Jim Slife.
In Atlanta?
In Atlanta, because it used to be at MIT, and it got, they, his whole collection, and wire screens and everything else.
Let me just read this here.
Dart Hunter is the outstanding authority on paper and papermaking in the world today, in all probability the most ardent exponent of this ancient craft who has ever lived.
That's what it says here.
He was born in Steubenville, Ohio in 1883, the sixth successive generation of a family of printers and publishers.
I love this already.
He was educated at the Ohio State University, and it goes on.
Bababa originally trained as a topographer, he early became interested in paper and papermaking and has studied this industry in virtually every part of the globe.
He has traveled to the far corners of the earth in search of tools, appliances, and equipment used by papermakers and specimens of their products.
This quest has taken him to every papermaking country in Europe, to China, Korea, Indochina, Manchuria, Siam, Japan, Malaysia, the Philippines, the Netherlands, East Indies,
Many of the Netherlands, East Indies is one phrase.
Many of the native states of India to Central America, Mexico, Africa, Arabia, New Zealand, and scores of islands of the South Pacific Ocean.
That's unbelievable, isn't it?
For that period of time.
In addition, Mr. Hunter is a zealous craftsman in every aspect of bookmaking, author, illustrator, type designer, punch cutter, founder, paper maker, and printer.
He has produced books in which every step in the making, from the writing to the finished product, has been undertaken entirely unaided.
It is authoritatively stated that he is the only individual in the world's history who has achieved this unique accomplishment.
I have to write about him.
He's got to be in my book.
I say this with the machine running right now.
For many years, he maintained a studio in his home in Chillicothe, Ohio, where he issued limited editions of books produced in this manner and where he assembled an amazingly complete collection of papers and papermaking tools and equipment from all parts of the world.
In 1939, this collection was established in the MIT, where it forms the Dard-Hunter Paper Museum.
So it's no longer there at MIT?
No, no.
So the family moved it, or MIT lost it, or what?
MIT lost it.
They screwed around, and they put it in the basement.
So I could go see this thing in 45 minutes, and now I've got to go to Atlanta.
Well, then it went to Appleton, Wisconsin, and then finally that didn't work out, and it ended up in Atlanta, where they built a special...
It's worth a trip to Atlanta for me.
Mr. Hunter is the compiler of more than 16 books and brochures on the various aspects of paper and papermaking.
The present volume is the first to be issued in a commercial edition at a price within the means of the general reader.
And this is titled, Papermaking, the History and Technique of an Ancient Craft by Darren Hunter.
It's Alfred A. Knopf.
It's a bourgeois book.
And it is 1943.
I'm going to have to get a copy of this.
I'm on it already.
Excellent.
That's very, very, very interesting.
Now, this is my life with paper.
That's an autobiography.
That sounds pretty interesting, too.
You should sign these all probably up at Harvard.
Oh, I will.
This is 1957.
Oh, I'm sure.
I read at the Boston Athenaeum, which has everything as well.
Did I put that in the wrong place?
No, it's okay.
Okay.
So you're going to...
That's what I would do.
I would go up there and just start to read on it.
Was he recognized at this level when you started collecting him?
I think to a certain select hue in the library profession and private collectors.
Now, he was an honorary member of the Roe Fonk.
So there are a number of Roe founders that did buy his book when it came out, and they donated them after a period of time to the Art Museum or the Cleveland Public Library or Western Reserve Historical.
But I think when there was a resurgence of
you know, book finding and all of this business and paper making back in the 70s, all of a sudden he became very popular again.
As you know, everything in the book cycles are up and down, up and down, up and down.
Right now, I would say Dard Hunter is on the down, he's on the down, in the down part of the cycle.
Why is that?
Because people are, you know,
The Vogue is out.
It's out of Vogue right now.
It'll come back again, probably with the next generation.
Right now, everyone is into, you know, prints and this modern business, which I hate to say I don't understand.
I have a trouble...
So did you see that there's any scholarly use for the elements of this collection, or do you think it's pretty well covered in major collections?
That's not the kind of thing that you feel that you'd want to see deposited in a... My self?
Yeah.
No, I don't believe in giving to any of the public libraries or universities or colleges.
I never would, because once it goes to a college or a university, it seldomly comes out again, which means that
Had these all been sold to universities or colleges or what have you, I would have never had the chance of doing the collections.
And as we said at Jan's place, all the great collections are done by individuals.
They're never done by universities, colleges, or what have you.
They're all individuals who have that narrow focus, if you will, and the drive to accomplish this.
So your goal is to see this
go on in the life cycle in the collecting world.
I mean, to replenish the stock of, oh, that's your daughters, you know.
Yeah, my daughters.
I mean, these cases are built, so if you take this band off, the kickboard, the top comes off, and this all separates into one, two, three, four.
The ends come off.
They can move the whole thing out if they want, or they can leave it here.
Because this room is all used, basically, the front face.
beams came out of a state here in Cleveland.
And then I lengthened those, see, from there to there, and I spent hours.
You did this yourself?
With a carpenter who showed me how to do it.
And then I spent hours here filing them.
I see the seams now that you point them out, but I would never have noticed them before.
Filing them in, so they all came in, and then, you know, scraping them, and then with the wool, and then the, this has all come drained right over.
What do you call it again?
Comb, grain, white oak.
Combed.
Which means it's straight.
Grain, white oak.
It's beautiful.
And the panels, they were damaged in shipment.
These were 5 foot by 10 foot, and I bought them for, you know, because they were damaged.
They didn't want them.
These were all solid cars.
Solid what?
It's plywood.
Oh, I see.
And it's solid core.
I mean, many of the pieces of plywood, you know, have some kind of a substance.
Well, they have substance, but there's also voids in there and everything.
This is all solid three-quarter inch plywood.
And so we put this room together.
I spent a long time on this room.
And then the furniture was brought from an estate sale here.
And this is all hand-carved.
Romer Brooks, and I have the book on that.
The rug came out of Rockefeller's dining room when he closed the house up in Forest Hills here.
Oh, really?
Right.
And so all of this stuff here, you know, means something to me because I collected it over years, trying to eventually put this room together.
Wow.
And when was this room?
Twenty years ago.
I finished this in 75.
That's a beautiful painting over there, the Indian.
Yeah.
Now, who's that?
It's Kaus.
It's all Jack Barfield.
And there's bison over there.
Yeah, that is, remember, that's Hayes.
Jay Hayes, that's wonderful.
Look at the grid, huh?
That's the way they were?
Yeah.
That's great.
It's big, so it's nice.
So let's proceed along on the collection.
Is this the cornerstone of the collection, in your view?
Right.
You know, from printing, you go to papermaking on this.
Oh, I thought we were doing papermaking.
I mean, from papermaking to printing.
Okay.
So these are all books that are having to do with printing.
Not all the time, because that's a whole Rosenbach collection over there.
While I didn't know him, I knew John Fleming very well.
You know, personally, the kids were up there already, and we had dinner and lunches at his place.
And I noticed these are doubles.
You have duplicates.
Oh, yeah.
The Mill on the Third River, whatever that is.
Well, that is the cardboard.
That's still in existence, the Davey Board Company.
When we had the bookbinding company, that's where I bought all the cardboard from.
So naturally, when they came out with the history of the company, I got two copies immediately, because that's what is used in all the boards for the books.
And these have to do with, those are reference books on the side.
These have to do with book binding and the care of books and all that.
Well, there's a lot of dibdin here, and these are all double shelves, so you made these deep enough to handle everything.
Hopefully, but it never does.
I have that set of bibliomania.
That's nice.
That's four volumes.
There's a fourth volume over there.
So we're into binding now in care, I noticed, creative bookbinding, the final solution to all problems by Alpers.
Is that what it is?
Yeah.
Alpers.
Oh, that's funny.
You see now?
That's a folio size, but the piece is missing.
Well, that's because it's in another room right now.
Okay.
You know, Arnold Werner, I don't know if you know, Arnold Werner used to do all the... Oh, that's so funny.
Arnold Werner?
That's so funny.
I've got to tell you, that's really very funny.
Where did you get the idea from this?
Well, this friend of mine who runs the Cold Firearms.
Yeah.
Yeah, I told you about the Bible.
And then when I was doing nuclear work, you were not allowed to carry any of the stuff into the facilities.
And we had tremendous arguments.
We were talking about a ten-thousandths in deviation and everything else.
So I carried this one in one day, and I laid it on the table.
These were before the days of metal detectors, too, probably.
They didn't.
It was a screw-up.
The ultimate?
DSR.
DSR is a discrepancy report, and we would be arguing over a thousand, ten thousand deviation over here or there on a part, see?
And you can make it grow.
If you put a hand on metal, you can make it bigger, or you cool the room down, you can shrink it.
Ten thousand isn't very much.
Your hair is two thousand thick, basically.
You have fine hair three thousandths in this course.
So I came in with this, and they said, what's this?
I said, I'm keeping track of all these discrepancy reports and how we have to answer them.
The guy said, can I see your book?
And I gave it to him.
And he went like, is that real?
I said, if one of these is missing, you know I'm really mad.
They stopped the whole meeting.
And they said, how did you get it in?
I said, well, I just walked in.
Let's see, it looks like a book out here.
Yeah.
Arno Werner, he was a finebinder for Harvard University.
Then his daughter married Larry Wilson.
He moved down to Hadley in Connecticut.
He did some of the papermaking in America.
Frank didn't do them all.
Arno just died about a year ago, and I'd see Arno periodically.
Arno made this up for me.
That's fun.
So this is basically a history of the book collection, would you say?
From... to every aspect.
So you have some Dibdins here, I noticed.
Do you have an 1809 Dibdin?
I don't really remember.
Tough one.
That could be it back there, that big one.
Oh, that's Spencer Library one.
In fact, Dibdin was the cataloger for that.
That's a beautiful cataloger.
I love that.
I really don't know.
I don't look.
That's okay.
I'm just curious.
But you do have a lot of Dibdin.
These are, you know, very, this one's like a forage.
What is it?
Forage.
You've seen forage.
Oh, okay.
Oh, absolutely.
This is a binding, you know, this.
You see, they're all different types.
These are samples of binding.
But the fun is, you know, everyone drinks wine.
So I collect books on brewing beer.
Brewing beer.
Well, that's your good heritage.
So, naturally, here's the one you have to have on fermentation.
Louis Pasteur.
And that's the title of it is?
Well, this is the volume that they did on pasteurization, fermentation.
You see?
Classic work.
That's how he felt.
Nobody's been able to tell me how to do this.
No, that's easy.
K-E-I-S-O-G-L-O-F-F.
L-O-F-F.
And he was the big Cleveland John F. He was the main man.
He knew them all.
He knew John met his wife at Rosenbach's.
Right?
And Peter remembers John when he was just a young man.
and they'd go out to lunch together.
He knew John before he got married.
And his wife, as I said, worked at Rosenbach's, and here's the earliest track on beer.
And that is, whew, I can't pronounce it.
Barliest, the earliest track on beer, dematurist, whatever.
Okay, I'll take your word for it.
You know, and so you start... Well, you've got St.
Augustine here.
Is that a Jensen, Nicholas Jensen?
Oh, yeah.
Oh, you've got some stuff here, Hugo, that you're not telling me about.
You're being very shy here.
Well, you know, I'm not going to go through the whole thing.
That's St.
Augustine de Civitate.
Here, this is the one that I get a kicker.
Rare original horn book with exhibition books, early 18th century, one of the few horn books with pedigree.
Oh, look at that.
And this is the box that was mailed in.
Wow.
And what's the date on it, do we think?
Oh, I don't know.
Not the date, but approximately.
I don't really know.
Look at the stamps.
It's still got stamps on it, for God's sakes.
That's wonderful.
The Wood Beyond the World, whatever it is.
Which one?
I'm just looking at the Wood Beyond the World.
That's William Morris.
Oh, okay.
Yeah, and there's... What are those Dantes way back there, those two big folios, without getting them?
Which one?
Those two, they're orange.
They're like an orange moron.
Oh, those, I don't know what that one is.
I think those years ago, I haven't looked at them here.
There's the...
Liber Scriptorium Authors Club Faust.
What is that Faust?
I don't know.
It is a printer.
God only knows.
Doug's Press or something.
I put them up many years ago, and, you know, I don't get to these only certain sections during the winter months when there's snow.
So it's been a long time since.
I've been in that because I've been working over and there.
I don't know that book, A Study of Rare Books by Noli Mummey, M-U-M-E-Y.
What's the air in it?
Let's see.
We've got 1930.
Noli Mummey.
I've never heard of him.
I'm interested.
It's English.
Oh, it's gorgeous.
Oh, my God.
Look at that, huh?
Yes.
Well, it says it was February to colophons, prestidizing, title pages.
19.
It's beautiful.
It's a beautiful book.
1930, right?
Mm-hmm.
He's actually studying the typography, I guess, and the colophon.
Okay.
So you've really got a whole double shelf.
These don't slide out, these shelves.
No, you have to take them out to get them.
But like Peeps, you put the big ones in back and the small ones in front.
Yeah, you try to get them.
So the shelf in the back is raised about three inches.
So you can see the titles.
That's why the lights are this way rather than on the top because now they'll shine back.
And you design these cases.
Oh, yeah.
This is all marine.
Oh.
This is English literature.
This is American over here.
We have an Uncle Tom's cabin.
Now, do you have these cases made for them?
No, most of them I bought that way.
You have quadrupeds of North America, three volumes.
A book of trout flies by Jennings, which I've heard of.
And then you've got these Franklin imprints down here.
Benjamin Franklin imprints, of course.
I have this book.
I picked that up at an auction.
It's a bibliograph of a philosophical society, I guess.
Franklin imprints are very nice.
You have to have some in the library to make a fill in.
How about Isaiah Thomas, my old Worcester Mass?
Yeah, I have some stuff.
I don't know.
Because he was certainly significant.
He didn't do beautiful work, to me, but everybody.
Let's see now.
You wanted Bill Womley.
He spelled his name for me.
Who did you need now?
You wanted... No, I think I've got John Linseth, too.
You have his?
Yeah.
Okay.
It's not going to matter much anyway if I can't use it, so... Right.
This is the last yearbook that we did with letterpress.
This is the one when I was the president.
This is our house.
This is the parking lot that we finished.
No.
In here.
And Shad Hardwell, in memory of his father, he put a stained glass window in there.
And you'll see that in here.
And this is the last one.
It's done by letterpress after that.
And these were all handmade and figured by John Sabota.
It's wonderful.
This is basically all Roe Fon publications.
Let me just count this.
So on the side cases of the alcoves, you call these alcoves?
Yeah, whatever you want.
But these are all row farm publications from here up.
Those are the yearbooks down to there.
These are the various publications that the club has done throughout the year.
Then, of course, I get into my riverboats.
And then down here is I started a collection once of mummies.
I was going to make a complaint department down at work, you know.
Talk to the mummy.
Can you tell me about the debris?
These are early exploration volumes.
This is basically exploration.
This, as you can see, is still some printing stuff.
These are the volumes.
They have the original journal of the Lewis and Clark Expedition.
That's very nice.
They just came out.
They have the coliforms up there, which I have.
Very, very nice.
Very nice.
And this is basically Cleveland, Ohio.
Ohio exploration.
And there's a street, your catalog's back there.
And this is Western.
You know, because some of the people... Well, that's Parkman.
You have some Parkman there.
Right.
Because this is... A lot of these people I met through Jack Barfields.
Mm-hmm.
You know, I did get to meet Harold McCracken.
And, you know, many of these...
Things are autographed to me because, as I said, we'd go up three or four times a year when Peter was on a buying trip.
We'd just go up.
And I'd hold his bag and then start to learn.
That's great.
And it's been, you've never tired of it?
It's never something that's... No, I just don't have enough money.
Everything's gotten so damn expensive.
You have a want list?
I mean, there are things that... I can't afford them.
so you just don't allow yourself to have it.
I'm interested in this Nazi thing over here.
Somebody gave me this.
This is basically a promotion, let's see, from a second lieutenant to a first lieutenant.
I didn't think that Hitler would sign that.
No, but it's very close to this, but I have to check it out.
Somebody gave me this thing, you know, and it's very close to his signature.
So it's just one of those things that have to be done at a certain day, tomorrow, maybe next year.
This one, somebody gave me this.
Because this is an interesting thing.
Because this had a beer ad in here.
So you're interested in beer, huh?
Well, I don't like wine, so I drink beer.
Of course, my gutters are a wine kind of source.
The Budweiser ad.
Buy the case.
Deliver it to your home.
So it's pretty low.
You've got a four-digit telephone number.
Right.
Still, there's no one.
It says, Be Ready.
Oh, Be Ready.
Sure.
Be Ready, right?
Now, you look at this thing here, and you say, this is 21, and you say, Budweiser, Be Ready.
You know, and I don't know.
I have to check that out because I don't know the distributor that,
was like that, you know?
Well, this is now pre-Prohibition, of course, right?
Yes.
And so I have to check this out, and one of these days I'll get down and just check this out, you see?
This is called the Cleveland Topic, I guess.
Cleveland Topics.
Right.
And, you know, it's a collection that I'm comfortable with.
It's not like
he yawns over there where he's honed in very tightly.
You know what I mean?
I don't, I'm not that honed in.
So it satisfies you in a way that you feel that you've documented, I guess.
Right.
It's where I can show you out of many different things.
As I was telling his good wife, when
Well, don't worry about it.
No, I'm trying to think of Gutenberg.
They said he just, you know, he's movable press and type.
Movable type, yeah.
Well, the key to it was that previous to that they made type out of brass, out of copper, out of steel.
They had wood blocks, of course.
Everything.
But, you know, when you take the letter P as an example, and you use that a lot,
the center of the P fills in.
And if you use certain words like the vowels, A, E, I, O, U, they will be used much more than W, X, Y, Z. So as you're printing, the mostly used letters are going to start to lose their height, whereas the lesser used ones have got a different height.
So when you print, you will have a difference in the
The print that's on the page, one will be light and one will be heavy.
Now, Gutenberg designed a metal, came up with a composition of metal, so that when he cast this type in a mold, like if you were making lead soldiers, you made lead soldiers.
I don't, but I don't.
As a kid, maybe you did.
Well, I did, yeah.
Okay.
He poured them.
All the letters were the same height.
The metal didn't shrink.
So now when we'll say the vials got worn, he could throw all the lead back into a pot, melt it up, and cast all the letters.
The essence of the linotype machine, really.
I'll get into that.
So I took, from the book finding company, I read composition for the linotypes and the Ludlow's and had them analyzed.
And they still had a piece of type from Gutenberg they maintained.
They'd analyzed it.
And it's so close together, what they're using on the linotype, that only you have a little more flow to it.
So it flowed a little easier, and then you had the cleansing agent, so you got the dross to the top.
But it doesn't deviate very much in 500 years.
Okay, now you take the linotype.
Mark Twain, remember you put a fortune into it?
Do you know what the key to the linotype is?
Okay.
He took a bath on it, didn't he, Mark?
He took a bath.
He took a big bath.
Gee, there's a type here.
So you collect type, too?
No, I brought this home from the book finder.
I love these shelves.
They're indestructible.
Well, let me see.
Yeah, let me take a picture.
And if you take the linotype, the mat is... Mm-hmm.
And it comes over.
Okay.
Okay, the surface over is basically on here.
Now, what Mergenthaler came up with is the V. By changing the notches, cutting one out here and maybe cutting this one out of there, he came up with a combination, 90 combinations.
And so when it took the type and went up to the top and went on this master bar, when it hit the right combination, it fell down the chute.
That was the key to the whole thing.
Now, they also, they put a... Right.
That's what Mergenthaler came up with, is this combination in here.
They also now have a little indent in here.
So now you can work two adjoining magazines.
If the finger picks it up in here, it goes to this magazine, first one.
If it doesn't pick it up, it goes to the top.
See, so now you can work two adjoining magazines.
With the line of type.
Or inner type.
They're basically the same.
But this is the key that Mergenzahler came up with.
Right there.
That's the key.
Nothing else.
That's amazing.
Right.
When you get down to those little factors or whatever you want to call them.
I just read the dodo ring.
Is that possible?
No, that's the alarm.
Oh, I see.
One of the alarms that my wife is on her way, I think.
Okay.
I did hear a complete ring.
You can see that there are, you know, when you go back, all the way back, the lead was the key, the composition of it.
The ingredient.
That excites you, doesn't it?
Yeah.
It's so simple yet.
Oh.
But, I mean, they haven't changed it in 500 years.
Same damn stuff.
It's the same thing.
When you think of all the money they poured into this design, and here this guy comes up with this V. This little V. V. And as you, to me, I like to try different things, as you can see.
Always trying something else to see if it'll work, if it won't work.
Try it, right?
Because if you don't try, nothing happens.
That's right.
That's the whole essence of invention, isn't it?
You've got to try.
And some people like to do it.
Some people don't.
I like to try.
Everything I try is different.
You know, this house fireproof wood, now we know what's wrong.
That's okay.
I can get stainless steel nails.
We'll put them all back in again.
But the drywall is all fireproof, right in here.
All across here, all this board being solid.
Very slow burn, because we're on a volunteer fire department.
It takes time.
These guys, you know, they're trying to figure out what the hell to do.
And you certainly don't want a sprinkler system that's going to destroy all these books.
No, sprinkler systems are no good.
Sprinkler systems basically do more damage than what they say.
If you've ever been in a place that's had
And I've been in a place already that the sprinkler system's gone a lot.
Disaster.
You know what I mean?
It becomes a total disaster.
Your insurance company thinks they saved everything.
Makes it harder to get your money back, probably.
Yeah.
I mean, I'd rather have the damn thing burned to the high, burned to the ground.
We have power walls in here and everything else.
It's beautifully protected then.
Can we just take a look at some of these?
What are these?
Debris?
Debris.
I mean, these are 1500s to 1600s.
What makes this so interesting?
Look at how beautiful they are.
Look at the pictures.
These are magnificent.
Oh, look at that.
And these are so early, right?
These are all early voyages.
Hello.
If you weren't on the porch, you'd have to be up here.
How are you?
I'm Nick.
Nick.
Nice to meet you.
Pleasure to meet you.
I saw a strange bag on my kitchen.
I forgot my initials on it.
I'm sorry.
That's me.
Yeah.
Anyway, that's me.
I'm sorry.
I just wanted to get that bag.
No, no, no.
There's someone here.
Just one quick question.
Did you see Charlie?
You know, he didn't do the inside of the garage doors.
And I didn't think to tell him that.
And they needed to.
of the beast down here.
Should I call him?
You can talk to him and see what he wants to do.
He's coming back?
I don't know if he is.
He said he was done.
Asked me if we have to add the insides to him.
That's beautiful.
The pictures are what makes this look.
I can't read anything, but you look at the pictures.
And you probably have the whole life.
Well, tell me, explain a little bit about debris to me.
What exactly was it?
It's voyages.
And I really don't know.
I've never done my research on it.
We're talking 1594.
This is pretty... It's crazy because they have America and you have India.
You have a Latin edition.
You have a German edition.
So you brought them for the illustrations, really?
Yeah, right.
I see.
You see, but here's one by Stedman.
Oh, that's very well known, yeah.
Can you see what this has?
Sir H. Clinton, whoever that is.
With marginal notes by Sir Clinton.
He was the British general.
Really?
Yes.
And this, we're talking about the American Law of Independence, right?
Right.
And he's got his own history.
So he's got his own notes in here.
Wow.
That's London, 1794.
And that is his, the copy of the general.
It's his own.
So where did you find this?
At Fleming's.
Good for Fleming, huh?
Yeah.
So what is the focus over here?
Exploration?
Exploration, basically.
Exploration, you know.
This is Western.
You've got Hacklett's Voyages, I see.
Is that the first?
That's a tough.
That's a tough get.
It's through three volumes.
And that looks like a very early binding, too, doesn't it?
Wonderful.
And then I have books on pirates, you know, and things like that.
You've got to have books on pirates.
I love pirates, yeah.
I love maps to anything on cartography, yeah.
The one you've got to get that's the key to the whole thing is Buccaneers of America.
And that's the one that, you know, most of them, they pull the maps out of it.
And that has the maps in it?
Oh, yeah.
Can you show me one?
I have so, yeah.
Now, how come you have an Uncle Tom's Cabin?
How does that fit in to the collection?
Because it was available, right?
Yeah.
You know, and we have the other one.
We have this Mark Twain, a Yankee and King Arthur's Court.
You have the Huckleberry Finn.
Looking Backward, which is quite an important book, Bellamy's book.
This one, Uncle Tom's Cabin.
Yeah, I have Uncle Tom's Cabin over there.
This is called Buccaneers of America.
That's Morgan.
He was Bluebeard, right?
Are a true account of the most remarkable assaults committed in late years upon the coasts of the West Indies.
by the Buccaneers of Jamaica and Tortuga, both English and French, 1684, London.
Why?
There's a map.
No, that's in front of space.
This is the description here.
Most famous work of the American Pirates.
Who's the author?
S... Yeah, Esquimillion.
Yes.
Q-U-E-M.
E-L-I-N.
Okay.
This is the Don Seitz.
Well, that's the whole copy.
So, you know what?
I can find this in the whole panel, which I have.
You see, back in those days, you could find things like this.
No, you can't now.
Those days are gone.
That's suffering.
It just fits up on top of here.
And you probably, what you don't, what you probably missed is if you really want to see someone in theirs, all of the Webster's Dictionary from the first volume to the two volumes and all the later things, all by Webster.
Noah.
Yes.
All of his, and how many different ones are there offhand, do you think?
Oh, is that a first Peeps diary up there?
How about it looks old?
I picked up a fourth down in Cape Cod.
There's something about pizza.
I have a letter and so forth in one of the lives.
How about the wife of Johnson?
Is that a first?
You've got some stuff here, my friend.
This one is something like that.
Some of the bindings here are quite wonderful, I have to say.
We haven't even talked about that.
He uses memoirs over there.
Boswell's Life of Johnson.
Oh, I love Chesterfield's letters.
Is that the first Chesterfield's letters?
It should be.
Yeah.
The bindings, though.
I got the first Irish, which is pretty darn close.